I want to divide up this 30,000 into three
instructor assistant professors and see what I
can find. I said we're beginning to be enough
students in political science 206 and 7 which are
the state required political science courses
that we can and we've got some things to fill. Well,
so that was my first kind of policy decision. He
said, fine, break it up. And I brought in a couple of
instructors and an assistant professor. And
then I took a look at the curriculum. Well, it had
been designed from my predecessor asking the
faculty, what would you like to teach? Well, then
we got a strange array. For example, we had ancient
political theory and no other.
There was not adequate work in politics,
political parties, and so on. So, we were pretty
well off in comparative government, but nothing
Latin American, and we're next to Mexico. It seems
to me perfectly obvious that there ought to be
something that direction. And
so we undertake a full-scale curriculum
revision.
Was anybody key to that? Nobody special. We as a
faculty wanted committees and began to work it
over. Did they work together pretty well on that?
Yeah. The third thing that I'd done almost
immediately I sensed that my predecessor had been
nasty Tibetan and he's what I call a
bleeding-heart bureaucratic liberal. I don't
know whether you're familiar with the title, talk
a wonderful
human relations game and are arbitrary as hell
when it comes to their own decisions. So I told the
faculty I'd like to do a deliberative faculty and I
want to make it clear that If we're discussing
something, I want to hear all sides, and I don't
care whether you differ with me or whether you
don't. I said, if we finally make a decision, I
expect us all to do it. But up to that point, I want
everybody to feel free without fear and favor to
express themselves. Well, it took about six
months before people began talk and feel that
maybe Van Riper meant what he said.
Now, during this period, you all were quartered
physically where? In the second story of the YMCA.
We had that floor, which had a couple of classrooms
in it, enough offices. My office is the one that was
the personnel office for some time. This man
Benton, describe Gene Blue Book Benton. Well,
Gene was interesting
in that he was the only one in the faculty that had
any kind of reputation outside the university.
He'd done an excellent book on Nuremberg trials.
Gene was one of the worst lecturers possible.
But it was funny. After a year or two, I would get
letters back from people praising his legal
training. He did public law. Because he said, Gene
taught me to write a brief. And as I say, as a
lecture, he'd put you to sleep. But I had the same
problem at Cornell with Harold Gosnell, who was
distinguished in the The first man to do a
political science book based on
punch card voting. This is 1930. Eight
or nine or so. Progressive politics in Iowa. And
uses factor analysis and he does the whole goddamn
thing by hand.
He was so far ahead of the game, but most of us, when
he lectured, there are nuggets through this
thing, but we figured half the time we wondered if
he was drunk. Did you ever, those of us who knew
Benton heard him identified by the students as
Blue Book Benton, were there any anecdotes that
came to the department head? No, not so much on that
score.
Maybe I shouldn't say this, but I always heard him
described as boobs-bent. There's certain other
attributes in the family.
But he and I always got along fine. Now, he taught
big sections in state government also. He taught
state and local government because he had a
textbook in him. And he was my saving when it came to
schedules. I always had to have some 8 o'clock
courses, and Benedict wanted five right across
the board. Five 8 o'clocks was fine. So I just laid
those out, and that took care of my 8 o'clock. Now,
Jack Woods was nicknamed Jock Woods because
supposedly athletes would pass his course
always. But Jack, I also got complaints about Jack
Because he taught, again, law work in
administrative law and also, oh, I forget another
course. And Jack taught by the Socratic method,
which God knows is peculiar enough
undergraduate. And some people would come in and
say, I can't take it. And I would let them out and not
argue about it. But more people, again, would
write back, Jack taught me how the law worked.
So it was funny. I had a lot of complaints on those
two people, but the most compliment. And Kwong Roe
was already here? Kwong Roe was here. He was an
associate professor with Denny. What was his
specialty? His Far Eastern studies. I
kept trying to encourage Roe to do more
publication because, and he finally did some. But
Kwong performed well as far as I was concerned.
Was there a master's degree when you got here? Yes,
they had just an ordinary MA. About what was the
enrollment in number of undergraduate majors and
graduate majors? Well, I'm trying to think of the
figures then. We had, I suppose, several hundred
undergraduate majors. Now it's two or three times
that.
And of course we had enormous enrollments. We had
everybody in the university practically because
Blinn College isn't here then much in American
government and state and local government. What
about at the graduate level?
or five or six PhD candidates. You mentioned, what
about at the Masters? How many Masters? At the
Masters, about, oh, it varied between, for two or
three years, between five and ten. Now,
basically... Tended to be more teachers who
were... Could you generalize about the political
science undergraduate majors, what their career
goals were? Well, it was very clear that we had a lot
of pre-law, and we had a lot of core.
I was here one year, and the next year we were to have
a self-study for crediting purposes. And a
professor from South Carolina came in and said,
why are you teaching so much comparative
government? I said, we've got the
core students are interested in it. They're going
to be all over the world. I said, so we're a little
disproportionate yet in terms of international
affairs, comparative government. Benton taught
international relations as well as
So as I say, we wanted junior faculty. We redid the
curriculum. I wanted a mixture of
traditional and behavioral. So to do justice to
the behavioral, I set up the first departmental
laboratory when we moved to Bolton Hall. It had
been the electrical engineering building, and it
had all the connections. So working with the head
of sociology, we did a two-way mirror, and we
didn't have computers then. We had a bank of
calculators. And we set up a 208
and 9 as methodological courses. I had gone
through Chicago without a methodological
course.
Nobody taught political science methodology.
I'd had some from White in the historical method.
I'd had Gosnell's work in political parties, but
it was his quantitative work that was novel, but he
didn't teach it as such. I took a course in
statistics and
psychology.
And I took a course in accounting in the business
school at Chicago. So I had more than was customary
in my generation. It looked like this was coming,
so I began. And we've carried on ever since with the
laboratory. And so
those are the main kind of thrusts at the
beginning. Then Maxwell asked for a five-year
plan. And I indicated something, building from
the bottom. We'd done the curriculum. We had the
laboratory. I said, I would like to get an MPA and a
PhD in due course. I thought we ought to do the MPA
first
and then a PhD. Did he seem fully supportive of
these? Oh, yes. Yeah. He just wanted us to have a
plan. He wasn't trying to tell us what it ought to
be.
And so he
also fully, he was one of the few deans who fully
understood all, he was an economist, he
understood the whole damn budgetary process. In
fact, he was working with the coordinating board
in the legislature to get the per credit hour stuff
modified to a certain amount of reality.
So
then I developed a, to get us some additional
income, We could do an exemption exam for Poli Sci
206. So I had done one at Cornell. So I designed my
own. And we gave the exemption exam. And we got the
$15 per student who took it or passed it or not and
added to our departmental funds to some extent.
And I needed maybe one less professor to teach a
section. Let's see, beyond that... Describe the
process of getting those two new degrees. Oh,
the... What was the red tape? What were the
hearings? Well, the MPA was first. I worked with
the dean of business, John... Pearson. Pearson.
On that, who had some interest. He had a state and
local finance man. He had Arthur Wolfe, who was
Ph.D. Chicago in personnel. And so he had some
things that would fit into a public program. And he
was supportive, thank heaven. And so he and I
designed one. And unfortunately, the
coordinating board, which had been passing
everything, this is what led Gibb, my
predecessor, to make a mistake on his PhD.
Coordinating board had been proving anything A&M
asked. Just as we got through the university
faculty, our MPA proposal, courting board put a
two-year moratorium on all new degrees. So I'm...
That doesn't do us any good for a Ph.D. either. So
I've been seven years a department head, and I
decide that's enough, and we...
ride out the two years, and the MPA is then
approved. So that would have been about what year?
79.
And we have a, it's going very nicely.
Heavily an evening effort, as it needs to be,
although we had some courses in the regular time.
We must have had, after a year or two, we have 30
to 50 in residence at any one time. So it began about
the decade of 1980? 79, essentially. Okay, 79. And
I'm the, I function as the director of it. So you've
done that now for? I've done that for two years, and
then retired.
Your history man became dean.
Oh, what's his name? Following, he, who hated
Nance. Wait, wait, dean or president? Dean, dean
of liberal arts. After Maxwell?
My mind is going blank. Well, he was history all
right. Where'd he? He'd been in the department,
and I can't think of his name. When we had all the
former deans here, he came to dinner a while back.
Oh, I know perfectly well. Well, we'll think of
them in a minute. Let's see.
Describe John C. Calhoun as vice president and
Jack Kenny Williams as president during those
years. Well, the one I liked most was the generals.
He was president my first year. Yes. Describe
working with him. He didn't have much to work with.
He let us do what we wanted to do, but he's the only
president who ever had the department head each
one of them in for a visit. Describe that visit. It
was very pleasant. Asked me what I was interested
in, where I came from, any special problems, and
the rest of it. Very calm and relaxed. Did he seem
like a good listener? Yes, very much so. Oh, yeah. I
had him into our pub ad program to lecture three or
four times after that. Describe him as a
personality. What was his style? The calmest,
most relaxed general I ever saw. Did he seem well
organized? Oh, yes. He knew exactly what he was
doing. I'm quite convinced. And you can't be, you
know, president. Executive Vice President of TRW
Systems and Director of the Atomic Energy
Commission as well as a Major General without
knowing what you're doing. Yes, I thought he was a
breath of fresh air and the most relaxed. Things
went right on without great
Horace Byers was academic vice president when I
came. This is the day when paperwork is still at a
minimum. He ran the academic vice president's
office with, I think, an assistant and a
secretary, and that was it. One of
the Ag buildings.
So, yeah, the only real interesting thing I had
with Horace Byer was I was wanting to offer a
position to Elias Thermas in political theory and
discovered that I had to get permission to him,
that Elias did not have his final naturalization
paper. So I had to get permission to are a
foreigner. So I wrote a semi-tongue-in-cheek
note to Bayer that I'm requesting this because
he's well qualified, he has a background, but also
I think I'm hiring among other things to teach
ancient political theory and I think it's highly
appropriate that a Greek teach Plato and
Aristotle.
Dr. Byers approved it immediately.
So, yeah, he was the only person, I think, in the
whole blessed university faculty who was a member
of the National Academy at that time. Yeah,
T-H-E-R-M-I-S. T-H-E-R-M-O-S, like Thermos
Jug.
And then Dr. Byers retired. And John Calhoun
became the vice president, and Williams is by then
president. Describe your impression of them and
working with them. Calhoun had some of the
problems of an engineer understanding the social
sciences. For example, I let my instructors
teaching 206
and 207 choose their own textbooks. Now, this was
something Calhoun did not understand quite,
because in the sciences, et cetera, you all agreed
on a textbook. Well, I got cold on that, and I said,
look, all our textbooks operate one
constitution.
They all revolve around it. And I said, in Texas, we
got one constitution also. Now, this is our
periodic table.
And I said, so I said, if you order me, I will comply.
But I said, they're getting substantially the
same thing, but probably better because the
people ordering textbooks are a little better
able to teach it that way than some other way. So I
said, this doesn't bother me. Then later
on, we got some questions in the academic
program committee, et cetera, about law.
Why shouldn't all law be one place? Public law goes
with business law. I said, well, we have no
particular use for business law. They're well
able to teach it. I have nobody here to teach the
common law or contracts or other things. But I
said, public law is constitutional law and
administrative law, and the business people
don't deal with that. Now, I said, we're not
playing in each other's bailiwick, essentially.
He finally understood that.
He and I are still on good terms, but I had to explain
these things to a dean who wasn't quite so sure of
what we were doing. Well, I had one lecturer who was
accused of sexual assault on a student, of having
sexual relations with a student.
I relieved him from teaching immediately. He came
in and gave me the story. He said, yes, I had sexual
relationship. We had a wonderful evening. She
thoroughly enjoyed it. I said I can well believe it
but where do we go from here I said I'm relieving you
until this is settled from your teaching and
meanwhile attend to your courses and hope for the
best well I got I figured this story is going to get
to Calhoun immediately and because the Carolyn
Adair is in the Dean's office Dean of Students
Office Dean of Students Office and she's all
exercised over the girl so this gets to Calhoun and
I figure I better be in early tomorrow morning
because I'm going to get a call from Calhoun and I
sure did about 8 15. I was there to answer I didn't
always get in at 8 o'clock every morning. And he
said,
what's the story? And I gave him the story. And he
said, you mean without consulting me, you
relieved a faculty member of his teaching? I said,
yes. Said, what would you think if it came out that I
had not relieved him in the press? I had not
relieved somebody so acute. That kept him quiet.
What was his reaction to that response? He said,
OK, I guess you have a point.
I said, I'm on top of this, and
we're handling it. Well, sure enough, after the
girl was afraid of her parents' reaction,
The girl would be candid afterward. It had been
consensual, completely so.
Did you have any, now your title was department
head or chairman? Head. Head, all right. And what
did that mean to you compared to chairman? Well, it
was very clear what it meant.
push came to shove, I could do it. And if you had your
druthers today, would that be what A&M would do
today? Which is better? I think in the long run
chair is better
because Head gives people like my predecessor,
Hornance, delusions of grandeur, very easy. How
long should the term be? Well, I thought the period
that I served my terms were in terms of five years.
And was there a review by some? Yeah, Maxwell had a
review, and I started the second. term and two more
years and I said I think this is I've done what I can
do and the coordinating board's sitting on
everything and somebody else can so we brought Sam
Kirkpatrick in. Who's done pretty well since
then. Yes I did think probably I said Dean if I'm
resigning I said could I be chair to select of the
committee to select my successor he said okay.
It's a little unusual how did y'all find Sam? He
came in by application. He was at Oklahoma? At
Oklahoma, yes. He had just been, I also knew him, he
had just been president of the Southern Political
Science Convention in his early 30s. And he'd
cleaned up a major scandal in that with very
little. There'd been a treasurer who'd been
around for years who was taking advantage of the
place.
And after being here, he went to Arizona State as
dean. And then president at UT San Antonio, now
retired. I don't know. No, I think he still is.
Because he almost replaced me as president in 1987
at UT El Paso. And I understand, that's my way of
saying I don't, I'm not, I wouldn't stand up in
court and say this is a fact, but I understand that
it was a very close finish and that the board, the UT
board kind of said, Dr. Kirkpatrick, just don't
worry. We'll have other vacancies and we'll get
back to you. And the next vacancy was at San Antonio
and he was a good fit. All right, looking back on
those years in leading political science here, of
what are you most proud of?
Oh, I think of just a collection of things, of
getting things organized so the department had a
quite firm base. And when compared numerically,
compare your first year and your last year in terms
of majors and degrees. Well, for example, when I
came, we had 13 faculty equivalents. My last year,
we had a faculty of 40. My, my. My last year as
department head, we hired 10 people. It seemed to
me I was visiting with faculty every day of the
year. And in terms of degree, the master's, the MPA
was underway fully. It had been designed and was
before the coordinating board. Let's see, we
skipped over. Did you have any relations with Dr.
Williams? And any comments about him and his
leadership? Not much, except I was in to visit him a
couple of times.